PEP 710: Recording the provenance of installed packages (#3076)
python/peps: pep-0710.rst

PEP: 710
Title: Recording provenance of installed packages
Author: Fridolín Pokorný <fridolin.pokorny at gmail.com>

> Sponsor: Donald Stufft <donald@stufft.io>

Reviewer: Great, thanks @dstufft !

> PEP-Delegate: Paul Moore <p.f.moore@gmail.com>

Reviewer 2: Yes, I'm fine with being PEP-delegate

> Discussions-To: https://discuss.python.org/t/draft-pep-recording-provenance-of-installed-packages/24838

Reviewer 3: Resolving this, I'll make sure it's done post merge.

is generally lost. Nevertheless, there are use cases for keeping records of
distributions used for installing packages and their provenance.

Python wheels can be built with different compiler flags or supporting
different wheel tags.  In both cases, users might get into a situation in which
multiple wheels might be considered by installers (possibly from different
package indexes) and immediately finding out which wheel file was actually used
during the installation might be helpful. This way, developers can use
information about wheels to debug issues making sure the desired wheel was
actually installed. Another use case could be tools reporting software
installed, such as tools reporting SBOM (Software Bill of Material), that might
give more accurate reports. Yet another use case could be reconstruction of the
Python environment by pinning each installed package to specific distribution
consumed from a Python packagee index.

The motivation described in this PEP is an extension to :pep:`610`.  Besides
stating information about packages installed using a direct URL, installers SHOULD
record information also for packages installed from Python package indexes when

> identified by their name, and optionally their version.

Reviewer: (Re-bumping this in the latest review)

> identified by their name, and optionally their version.

Author: Moved to the Rationale section and removed ALLCAPS as suggested.

The ``provenance_url.json`` JSON file MUST be a dictionary, compliant with
:rfc:`8259` and UTF-8 encoded.

If present, it MUST contain exactly two keys. The first one is ``url``, with
type ``string``.  The second key MUST be ``archive_info`` with a value defined
below.

The ``url`` field MUST state a URL to the installed distribution. If a wheel is
built from a source distribution, the ``url`` field MUST point to the used
source distribution. On the other hand, when a wheel is installed, the
``url`` field MUST keep a URL of the installed wheel. Following :pep:`610`, the
``url`` field MUST be stripped of any sensitive authentication information, for
security reasons.

The user:password section of the URL MAY however be composed of environment
variables, matching the following regular expression::

    \$\{[A-Za-z0-9-_]+\}(:\$\{[A-Za-z0-9-_]+\})?

Additionally, the user:password section of the URL MAY be a well-known,
non-security sensitive string. A typical example is ``git`` in the case of an
URL such as ``ssh://git@gitlab.com``.

The value of ``archive_info`` MUST be a dictionary with a single key
``hashes``.  The ``hashes`` key is a dictionary mapping a hash name to a

> hex-encoded digest of the file referenced by the ``url`` field. Multiple hashes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
hex-encoded digest of the file referenced by the ``url`` value. Multiple hashes
```

As previously, use more precise and consistent terminology

Deprecate direct_url.json and use only provenance_url.json
----------------------------------------------------------

File ``direct_url.json`` is already well established in :pep:`610` and is
already used by installers. For example, ``pip`` uses ``direct_url.json`` to
report a direct URL reference on ``pip freeze``. Deprecating
``direct_url.json`` would require additional changes to the ``pip freeze``
implementation in pip (see [2]_) and could introduce backwards compatibility
issues for already existing ``direct_url.json`` consumers.

Keeping the hash key in the archive_info dictionary
---------------------------------------------------

:pep:`610` and `its corresponding canonical PyPA spec
<https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/specifications/direct-url/>`__ discuss
the possibility to state ``hash`` key alongside the ``hashes`` key in the
``archive_info`` dictionary. This PEP explicitly discards the ``hash`` key in
the ``provenance_url.json`` file and expects only ``hashes`` key to be present.
By doing so we eliminate possible redundancy in the file, possible confusion,
and any additional checks that would need to be done to make sure hashes are in
sync.

> Making the hashes field optional
> --------------------------------

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Making the hashes key optional
------------------------------
```

Use clearer and more appropriate terminology

:pep:`610` and `its corresponding canonical PyPA spec
<https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/specifications/direct-url/>`__

> recommend stating the ``hashes`` field of the ``archive_info`` in the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
recommend including the ``hashes`` key of the ``archive_info`` in the
```

* Use clearer and more appropriate phrasing and terminology

> ``direct_url.json`` file but allows ignoring it under certain circumstances
> following :rfc:`2119`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``direct_url.json`` file but it is not required (per the :rfc:`21119` language):
```

* Clarify what "it" is being ignored (the recommendation, whereas the context implies it is tools ignoring the value of the hash or similar)
* Clarify the role of RFC 2119 (Currently, the text implies that RFC dictates the circumstances under which the hashes could be ignored, but rather it just defines the language used)
* Simplify and shorten the overall phrasing

  A hashes key SHOULD be present as a dictionary mapping a hash name to a hex
  encoded digest of the file.

> This PEP enforces availability of the ``hashes`` field of the ``archive_info``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This PEP requires the ``hashes`` key be included in ``archive_info``
```

* Use clearer, more appropriate and more direct language
* Use more specific, defined terminology, consistent with the quote from PEP 610

> in the ``provenance_url.json`` file if ``provenance_url.json`` file is created:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in the ``provenance_url.json`` file if that file is created; per this PEP:
```

* Clarify the source of this quote (this PEP, not PEP 610 or somewhere else)
* Avoid repetition and missing definite article

  The value of ``archive_info`` MUST be a dictionary with a single key
  ``hashes``.

By doing so, consumers of ``provenance_url.json`` file can perform check on
artifact digests when ``provenance_url.json`` file is created by installers.

Open Issues
===========

Availability of the provenance_url.json file in Conda
-----------------------------------------------------

> We would like to get feedback on the ``provenance_url.json`` file by Conda

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We would like to get feedback on the ``provenance_url.json`` file from Conda
```

Use correct conjunction (queue Schoolhouse Rock)

> maintainers or developers. It is not clear whether Conda would like to adopt

Reviewer: ```suggestion
maintainers. It is not clear whether Conda would like to adopt
```

Avoid redundancy

the ``provenance_url.json`` file.

Using provenance_url.json in downstream installers
--------------------------------------------------

The proposed ``provenance_url.json`` file was meant to be adopted primarily by

> Python installers. Other installers, such as apt or dnf, might record

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Python installers. Other installers, such as APT or DNF, might record the
```

* The proper names of the two projects are both uppercase.
* Add missing definite article

> provenance of the installed downstream Python distributions in their specific
> way that can be specific to downstream package management. The proposed file is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
provenance of the installed downstream Python distributions in their own
way specific to downstream package management. The proposed file is
```

* Avoid repetition in the department of redundancy department
* Clarify phrasing

not expected to be created by these downstream package installers and thus they
were intentionally left out of this PEP. However, any input by developers or
maintainers of these installers is valuable to possibly enrich the
``provenance_url.json`` file with information that would help in some way.

Backwards Compatibility
=======================

> Since this PEP specifies a new file in the ``*.dist-info`` directory, there are

Reviewer: You might want to mention, though, any research you've done to confirm that any existing tools are aren't reading or writing a file with the same (or very similar) name in that directory, as adding additional files to this directory is explicitly allowed by the installed project spec.

no backwards compatibility implications to consider in the ``provenance_url.json``
file itself. Also, this proposal does not make any changes to the

> ``direct_url.json`` described in :pep:`610` and `its corresponding canonical
> PyPA spec
> <https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/specifications/direct-url/>`__.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``direct_url.json`` described in :pep:`610` and
:ref:`its corresponding canonical PyPA spec <direct-url>`.
```

As above.

The content of ``provenance_url.json`` file was designed in a way to eventually

> allow installers reuse some of the logic supporting :pep:`610` when a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
allow installers reuse some of the logic supporting ``direct_url.json`` when a
```

Use the canonical, human-readable name instead of the historical PEP number (already referenced above)

direct URL refers to a source archive or a wheel.

References

> ==========
> 
> The following changes were done to pip to support this PEP:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
==========
```

Introducing and linking the relevant reference implementation(s) belongs better in a Reference Implementation section rather than References; I suggest moving that there.

> .. [1] `A patch to pip introducing provenance_url.json as discussed in this PEP
>   <https://github.com/fridex/pip/pull/1/>`__
> 
> .. [2] `Changes to pip to support the decision for creating
>   provenance_url.json instead of stating provenance in already existing
>   direct_url.json <https://github.com/fridex/pip/pull/2/>`__

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. _fridex/pip#1: https://github.com/fridex/pip/pull/1/

.. _fridex/pip#2: https://github.com/fridex/pip/pull/2/
```

* [Per PEP 12](https://peps.python.org/pep-0012/#hyperlinks), use normal direct links with an explicit name, rather than requiring the reader to click a tiny footnote, and then click the actual link they want.
* Use a more descriptive title for the reference, helping readers in general and a11y in particular
* Avoid hardcoded numbered footnotes, as they are fragile and very easy to break once editing the PEP (plus, they're out of order here).

> .. [3] `Direct URL Data Structure
>   <https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/specifications/direct-url-data-structure/>`__

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

I've replaced this with much more robust (and concise) intersphinx references rather than hardcoded URLs where needed (including in places where the URL was repeated anyway).

Acknowledgements
================

> Thanks to Dustin Ingram, Brett Cannon, Paul Moore for the initial discussion in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thanks to Dustin Ingram, Brett Cannon, and Paul Moore for the initial discussion in
```

Grammar

The ``provenance_url.json`` JSON file MUST be a dictionary, compliant with
:rfc:`8259` and UTF-8 encoded.

If present, it MUST contain exactly two keys. The first one is ``url``, with
type ``string``.  The second key MUST be ``archive_info`` with a value defined
below.

The value of the ``url`` key MUST be the URL from which the distribution package was downloaded. If a wheel is
built from a source distribution, the ``url`` value MUST be the URL from which
the source distribution was downloaded. If a wheel is downloaded and installed directly,
the ``url`` field MUST be the URL from which the wheel was downloaded.
As in the :ref:`direct URL origin specification<packaging:direct-url>`, the ``url`` value
MUST be stripped of any sensitive authentication information for security reasons.

The user:password section of the URL MAY however be composed of environment
variables, matching the following regular expression:

.. code-block:: text

    \$\{[A-Za-z0-9-_]+\}(:\$\{[A-Za-z0-9-_]+\})?

Additionally, the user:password section of the URL MAY be a well-known,
non-security sensitive string. A typical example is ``git`` in the case of an

> URL such as ``ssh://git@gitlab.com``.

Author: This probably does not belong here. It was originally taken from PEP-610 and Git URL will never be stored in the ``url`` as packages are installed using their names. Is there a use-case for stripping user:password in URLs here?

Reviewer: Maybe private package indices using HTTP Basic Authentication? But I'm certainly not the expert here, of course... @dstufft ?

Reviewer 4: As I mentioned before, this whole section should be replaced by a reference to https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/specifications/direct-url-data-structure/ and mentioning here only the parts that should differ (i.e. that only ArchiveInfo applies and possibly so additional fine tuning). 

This way, these questions would not even be raised in this context. Unless we want to evolve the specification of the direct URL data structure. Or unless we conclude the direct URL data structure is not applicable in this case, but I very much doubt it.

Reviewer 4: Also, I know there have been comments about the valid hash algorithms etc, but it might be that the person who commented about that was not aware of https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/specifications/direct-url-data-structure/ since it was not a standalone document at the time. It is also important to know that the hashes specification in the direct URL data structure is derived from PEP 691, so I think it is preferable to avoid creating yet another slightly different recommendation about acceptable hash algorithms.

Reviewer 3: Yea, I also would assume you'd never record user:password.

The value of ``archive_info`` MUST be a dictionary with a single key
``hashes``.  The value of ``hashes`` is a dictionary mapping hash function names to a
hex-encoded digest of the file referenced by the ``url`` value. Multiple hashes
can be included, and it is up to the consumer to decide what to do with
multiple hashes (it may validate all of them or a subset of them, or nothing at
all).

Each hash MUST be one of the single argument hashes provided by

> :data:`py3.11:hashlib.algorithms_guaranteed``, excluding ``sha1`` and ``md5`` which MUST NOT be used.

Author: ```suggestion
:data:`py3.11:hashlib.algorithms_guaranteed`, excluding ``sha1`` and ``md5`` which MUST NOT be used.
```

Reviewer: Oops, my mistake, sorry!

limitations of these hash algorithms. Conversely, hash ``sha256`` SHOULD
be included.

Installers that cache distribution packages from an index SHOULD keep
information related to the cached distribution artifact, so that
the ``provenance_url.json`` file can be created even when installing distribution packages
from the installer's cache.

Backwards Compatibility
=======================

Since this PEP specifies a new file in the ``*.dist-info`` directory, there are
no backwards compatibility implications to consider in the ``provenance_url.json``
file itself. Also, this proposal does not make any changes to the
``direct_url.json`` described in :pep:`610` and
:ref:`its corresponding canonical PyPA spec <direct-url>`.

The content of ``provenance_url.json`` file was designed in a way to eventually
allow installers reuse some of the logic supporting ``direct_url.json`` when a
direct URL refers to a source archive or a wheel.

Security Implications
=====================

One of the main security features of the ``provenance_url.json`` file is the
ability to audit installed artifacts in Python environments. Tools can check

> which Python package indexes were used to install Python :term:`Distribution Packages`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
which Python package indexes were used to install Python distribution packages
```

Oops, forgot about the plural...simpler to just de-link it here, I guess.

Author: This seems to work:

```suggestion
which Python package indexes were used to install Python :term:`distribution packages <Distribution Package>`
```

From rst docs:

> You can link to a term in the glossary while showing different text in the topic by including the term in angle brackets.

Thanks for all your suggestions!

Reviewer: Yeah, I know; I was just too lazy to type it out twice :)

Python wheels can be built with different compiler flags or supporting
different wheel tags.  In both cases, users might get into a situation in which
multiple wheels might be considered by installers (possibly from different
package indexes) and immediately finding out which wheel file was actually used
during the installation might be helpful. This way, developers can use
information about wheels to debug issues making sure the desired wheel was
actually installed. Another use case could be tools reporting software
installed, such as tools reporting a SBOM (Software Bill of Materials), that might
give more accurate reports. Yet another use case could be reconstruction of the
Python environment by pinning each installed package to a specific distribution
artifact consumed from a Python package index.

The motivation described in this PEP is an extension of those in :pep:`610`.  Besides
stating information about packages installed using a direct URL, installers SHOULD
record information also for packages installed from Python package indexes when
identified by their name, and optionally their version.

Rationale
=========

> [describing the reasoning behind the approach chosen in this PEP, and/or a brief history of the discussions that led to this PEP being proposed]

Reviewer: [Reminder to replace this with an actual Rationale]

Author: Done in [2356439](https://github.com/python/peps/pull/3076/commits/2356439ab1dbc8e50d01564664cc8b0c920acc93).

:data:`py3.11:hashlib.algorithms_guaranteed`, excluding ``sha1`` and ``md5`` which MUST NOT be used.
As of Python 3.11, with ``shake_128`` and ``shake_256`` excluded
for being multi-argument, the allowed set of hashes is:

.. code-block:: python

  >>> import hashlib
  >>> sorted(hashlib.algorithms_guaranteed - {"shake_128", "shake_256", "sha1", "md5"})
  ['blake2b', 'blake2s', 'sha224', 'sha256', 'sha384', 'sha3_224', 'sha3_256', 'sha3_384', 'sha3_512', 'sha512']

Each hash MUST be referenced by the canonical name of the hash, always lower case.

Hashes ``sha1`` and ``md5`` MUST NOT be present, due to the security
limitations of these hash algorithms. Conversely, hash ``sha256`` SHOULD
be included.

Installers that cache distribution packages from an index SHOULD keep
information related to the cached distribution artifact, so that
the ``provenance_url.json`` file can be created even when installing distribution packages
from the installer's cache.

Backwards Compatibility
=======================

Since this PEP specifies a new file in the ``*.dist-info`` directory, there are
no backwards compatibility implications to consider in the ``provenance_url.json``

> file itself. Also, this proposal does not make any changes to the

Reviewer: [Re-making this from before in revised form, since it got outdated anyway when this was moved]

It isn't quite true that there are no backward compat implications with adding this file, since installers are allowed to (and do, particularly with how license files are currently handled pre-PEP 639) add arbitrarily-named files to this directory. It's unlikely, but if any existing tool adds a file this this same name, it will conflict. For completeness, you might want to mention this, and any research/checks you've done to see if any existing tools might happen to be using a file with this name already.

Author: Okay, will include checks for this. Possible installers to be included: pip, Pipenv, poetry, pip-tools, installer, Conda, PDM. Please let me know if there is any missing or any should be excluded.

Reviewer: Seems like this was (comprehensively) address, so resolving this and will make any followup-comments as necessary :+1:

``direct_url.json`` described in :pep:`610` and
:ref:`its corresponding canonical PyPA spec <direct-url>`.

The content of ``provenance_url.json`` file was designed in a way to eventually
allow installers reuse some of the logic supporting ``direct_url.json`` when a
direct URL refers to a source archive or a wheel.

Security Implications
=====================

One of the main security features of the ``provenance_url.json`` file is the
ability to audit installed artifacts in Python environments. Tools can check

> which Python package indexes were used to install Python distributions as well
> as digests of these Python distributions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
which Python package indexes were used to install Python :term:`Distribution Packages`
as well as the hash digests of their release artifacts.
```

Again, use clear and unambiguous terminology here

These commands generate a ``direct_url.json`` file but do not generate a
``provenance_url.json`` file. These examples follow examples from :pep:`610`:

* ``pip install https://example.com/app-1.0.tgz``
* ``pip install https://example.com/app-1.0.whl``
* ``pip install "git+https://example.com/repo/app.git#egg=app&subdirectory=setup"``
* ``pip install ./app``
* ``pip install file:///home/user/app``
* ``pip install --editable "git+https://example.com/repo/app.git#egg=app&subdirectory=setup"`` (in which case, ``url`` will be the local directory where the git repository has been cloned to, and ``dir_info`` will be present with ``"editable": true`` and no ``vcs_info`` will be set)
* ``pip install -e ./app``

Commands that generate a ``provenance_url.json`` file but do not generate
a ``direct_url.json`` file:

* ``pip install app``
* ``pip install app~=2.2.0``
* ``pip install app --no-index --find-links "https://example.com/"``

This behaviour can be tested using changes to pip implemented in the PR
`pypa/pip#11865`_.

Reference Implementation
========================

A proof-of-concept for creating the ``provenance_url.json`` metadata file when

> installing a Python distribution is available in the PR to pip

Reviewer: ```suggestion
installing a Python :term:`Distribution Package` is available in the PR to pip
```

Again, please use clear and unambiguous terminology, rather than one overloaded with multiple contextually plausible meanings (particularly a colloquial one that does not match what you intend here)

`pypa/pip#11865`_. It reuses the already available implementation for the

> `direct URL data structure <direct_url_data_>`_ to provide

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:ref:`direct URL data structure <packaging:direct-url-data-structure>` to provide
```

As elsewhere, use a direct and more robust Intersphinx cross reference instead of a hardcoded URL

> ``provenance_url.json`` metadata file for cases when ``direct_url.json`` is not

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the ``provenance_url.json`` metadata file for cases when ``direct_url.json`` is not
```

Missing definite article

created.

A prototype called `pip-preserve <pip_preserve_>`_ was developed to

> demonstrate creation of ``requirements.txt`` file considering ``direct_url.json``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
demonstrate creation of ``requirements.txt`` files considering ``direct_url.json``
```

Fix grammar error (plural agreement)

and ``provenance_url.json`` metadata files.  This tool mimics the ``pip

> freeze`` functionality, but the listing of installed packages includes also
> hashes of Python distributions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
freeze`` functionality, but the listing of installed packages also includes
the hashes of the Python distribution artifacts.
```

* Fix word order
* Avoid ambiguous terminology
* Add  missing definite articles

artifact digests when the ``provenance_url.json`` file is created by installers.

Open Issues
===========

Availability of the provenance_url.json file in Conda
-----------------------------------------------------

We would like to get feedback on the ``provenance_url.json`` file from Conda
maintainers. It is not clear whether Conda would like to adopt
the ``provenance_url.json`` file.

Using provenance_url.json in downstream installers
--------------------------------------------------

The proposed ``provenance_url.json`` file was meant to be adopted primarily by
Python installers. Other installers, such as APT or DNF, might record the
provenance of the installed downstream Python distributions in their own
way specific to downstream package management. The proposed file is
not expected to be created by these downstream package installers and thus they
were intentionally left out of this PEP. However, any input by developers or
maintainers of these installers is valuable to possibly enrich the
``provenance_url.json`` file with information that would help in some way.

References
==========

.. _pypa/pip#11865: https://github.com/pypa/pip/pull/11865

> .. _fridex/pip#2: https://github.com/fridex/pip/pull/2/
> 
> .. _direct_url_data: https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/specifications/direct-url-data-structure/
> 
> .. _pip_preserve: https://pypi.org/project/pip-preserve/

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. _fridex/pip#2: https://github.com/fridex/pip/pull/2/

.. _pip_preserve: https://pypi.org/project/pip-preserve/
```

Replaced with a direct Intersphinx cross-reference above

to pip to obtain the provenance information, and includes additional metadata that
might not be necessary for checking the provenance (such as Python version
requirements of each distribution package). Also, this option is
specific to pip as of the writing of this PEP.

Note the current :ref:`spec for recording installed packages
<packaging:recording-installed-packages>` defines a ``RECORD`` file that
records installed files, but not the distribution artifact from which these
files were obtained. Auditing installed artifacts can be performed
based on matching the entries listed in the ``RECORD`` file. However, this
technique requires a pre-computed database of files each artifact provides or a
comparison with the actual artifact content. Both approaches are relatively
expensive and time consuming operations which could be eliminated with the
proposed ``provenance_url.json`` file.

Recording provenance information for installed distribution packages,
both those obtained from direct URLs and by name/version from an index,
can simplify auditing Python environments in general, beyond just
the specific use case for containerized applications mentioned earlier.

> environments. A community project `pip-audit

Reviewer: Oops, suggestion-editing mistake on my part, sorry

(FWIW, this one of the reasons why I find SemBr, or at the very least avoiding spliced sentences, to be much easier to edit, review and diff than fixed hard breaks).

> environments. A community project `pip-audit

Author: No worries at all!

I'll use SemBr in next PEPs if I'll have a chance to write one again - kept the current style if that's fine. Sorry for any additional work it requires on your end.

> environments. A community project `pip-audit

Author: > kept the current style if that's fine.

If you want me to change it, please let me know. I kept it because the rest of the PEP uses it, nevertheless I can find some time for it if it would make things better.

<https://github.com/pypa/distlib/blob/05375908c1b2d6b0e74bdeb574569d3609db9f56/distlib/database.py#L39-L40>`__.

Pipenv
------

`Pipenv`_ uses pip `to install Python package distributions
<https://github.com/pypa/pipenv/blob/babd428d8ee3c5caeb818d746f715c02f338839b/pipenv/routines/install.py#L262>`__.
There wasn't any additional identified logic that would cause backwards
compatibility issues when introducing the ``provenance_url.json`` file in the
``.dist-info`` directory.

installer
---------

`installer`_ does not create a ``provenance_url.json`` file explicitly.
Nevertheless, as per the :ref:`Recording Installed Projects <packaging:recording-installed-packages>`
specification, installer allows passing the ``additional_metadata`` argument to
create a file in the ``.dist-info`` directory - see `the source code
<https://github.com/pypa/installer/blob/f89b5d93a643ef5e9858a6e3f450c83a57bbe1f1/src/installer/_core.py#L67>`__.
To avoid any backwards compatibility issues, any library or tool using
installer must not request creating the ``provenance_url.json`` file using the
mentioned ``additional_metadata`` argument.

Poetry
------

The installation logic in `Poetry`_ depends on the

> ``installer.modern-installer`` configuration option (`see docs

Reviewer 5: `installer.modern-installation`

Besides stating information about packages installed using a direct URL,
installers should record information also for packages installed from Python
package indexes when identified by their name, and optionally their version.

The idea described in this PEP originated in a tool called `micropipenv
<https://github.com/thoth-station/micropipenv>`__ that is used to install
:term:`distribution packages <Distribution Package>` in containerized
environments (see the reported issue `thoth-station/micropipenv#206`_). When
installing a :term:`Distribution Package` during a containerized application
build, the assembled containerized application does not implicitly carry
information about the provenance of installed :term:`distribution packages
<Distribution Package>` when installed using their name, and optionally their
version.  This creates a requirement for container image suppliers to link
container images with the corresponding build process, its configuration and
the application source code for checking requirements files in cases when
software present in containerized environments needs to be audited.

The `subsequent discussion in the Discourse thread

> <pip_installation_report>`_ mentioned also

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<https://discuss.python.org/t/12316>`__ also brought up
```

* Use the correct hyperlink target (the text refers to the discussion in the Discourse thread, which the link text corresponds to, rather than the the docs on the installation report option)
* Fix the link syntax
* Fix word order
* Use more appropriate word

> a new option ``--report`` in pip that can generate a detailed JSON report about

Reviewer: ```suggestion
pip's new ``--report`` option that can
`generate a detailed JSON report <pip_installation_report_>`__ about
```

* Link the installation report here instead, where it is actually referenced in the text
* Use more idiomatic and readible word order

the installation process. This option could help with the provenance problem
this PEP approaches. Nevertheless, this option needs to be *explicitly* passed

> to pip to have the provenance information and carries additional metadata that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to pip to obtain the provenance information, and includes additional metadata that
```

Use more appropriate words

might not be necessary for checking the provenance (such as Python version

> requirements of each :term:`Distribution Package`). Also, this option is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
requirements of each distribution package). Also, this option is
```

Linked earlier in the section

> specific to pip as of today.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
specific to pip as of the writing of this PEP.
```

Use more specific, perennial time qualifier.

<packaging:recording-installed-packages>` defines a ``RECORD`` file that
records installed files, but not the installed artifact that brought these
files into the Python environment. Auditing installed artifacts could happen
based on matching the entries stated in the ``RECORD`` file. However, this
technique requires a pre-computed database of files each artifact provides or a
comparison with the actual artifact content. Both approaches are relatively
expensive and time consuming operations which could be eliminated with the
proposed ``provenance_url.json`` file.

Having information about the provenance of :term:`distribution packages
<Distribution Package>` stored in metadata files for cases when distribution
packages are installed by their direct URL as well as when installed by their
name and optionally their version from an index, can simplify auditing Python
environments in general. This auditing can be done beyond the use case for
containerized applications mentioned earlier and generalized for Python
environments. A community project `pip-audit
<https://github.com/pypa/pip-audit>`__ raised their possible interest in

> `pypa/pip-audit#170`_.

Reviewer 6: I haven't fully reviewed the PEP but this seems fine to me.

> `pypa/pip-audit#170`_.

Reviewer: Thanks!

Backwards Compatibility
=======================

Following the :ref:`packaging:recording-installed-packages` specification,
installers may keep additional installer-specific files in the ``.dist-info``
directory.  To make sure this PEP does not cause any backwards compatibility

> issues, there was conducted a research whether introducing the
> ``provenance_url.json`` file in the ``.dist-info`` directory is feasible and
> does not cause any backwards compatibility issues in the Python packaging
> ecosystem.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
issues, a :ref:`comprehensive survey of installers and libraries <710-tool-survey>`
found no current tools that are using a similarly-named file,
or other major feasibility concerns.
```

* Reference/link and summarize the major results of the survey
* Avoid repeating the purpose of the survey (ensuring there are no backward compat issues) twice in the same sentence
* Fix/avoid grammar errors and phrasing issues to make this passage easier to read

```

> A specification for :ref:`binary-distribution-format` lists files that can be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The :ref:`Wheel specification <packaging:binary-distribution-format>` lists files that can be
```

* Refer to this more directly
* Avoid relying on the page title to make sense in context

present in the ``.dist-info`` directory. None of these file names collide with
the proposed ``provenance_url.json`` file from this PEP.

Presence of provenance_url.json in installers and libraries

> -----------------------------------------------------------

Reviewer: I appreciate the thoroughness here; I would suggest, though, as it goes into a lot of comprehensive detail and the key point can ultimately be summarized in one sentence, that none of the tools surveyed currently use or would conflict with a `provenance_url.json` fie in the `.dist-info`, that this be moved to an appendix (between the `Open Issues` and the `Acknowledgements`), as these types of surveys generally go in other PEPs (don't forget to bump the section underbars up one level):

```rst
.. _710-tool-survey:

Appendix: Survey of installers and libraries
============================================

pip
---
```

 and then referenced in the suggestion below/paragraph above with a short summary (see that suggestion).

Author: Thanks, adjusted in [6c9e95c](https://github.com/python/peps/pull/3076/commits/6c9e95cae8854565e7f4519586e009c6058a8e92).

> A research conducted on the existing installers, libraries, and dependency
> managers in the Python ecosystem shown below proved there are no backwards
> compatibility issues and introducing the ``provenance_url.json`` file will not
> clash with any existing tool at the time of writing this PEP.
> 

Reviewer: To note, as written this essentially duplicates the information two paragraphs above if this remains here, but if moved to a separate appendix section as I recommend, it would make sense to keep this with the revisions that follow.

```suggestion
A comprehensive survey of the existing installers, libraries, and dependency
managers in the Python ecosystem analyzed the implications of adding support for
``provenance_url.json`` to each tool.
In summary, no major backwards compatibility issues, conflicts or feasibility blockers
were found as of the time of writing of this PEP.
```

* Revise following the form above and to be more appropriate for an independent appendix
* Fix grammar errors
* Avoid excessive verbosity
* Use more appropriate and qualified wording

pip
~~~

The function from pip's internal API responsible for installing wheels, named
`_install_wheel
<https://github.com/pypa/pip/blob/10d9cbc601e5cadc45163452b1bc463d8ad2c1f7/src/pip/_internal/operations/install/wheel.py#L432>`__,
does not store any ``provenance_url.json`` file in the ``.dist-info``
directory. Additionally, a prototype introducing the mentioned file to pip in
`pypa/pip#11865`_ demonstrates incorporating logic for handling the
``provenance_url.json`` file in pip's source code.

As pip is used by some of the tools mentioned below to install Python package
distributions, findings for pip apply to these tools as well as pip does not
allow parametrizing creation of files in the ``.dist-info`` directory in its
internal API. Most of the tools mentioned below that use pip invoke pip as a
subprocess which has no effect on the eventual presence of the
``provenance_url.json`` file in the ``.dist-info`` directory.

distlib
~~~~~~~

> `distlib <distlib_homepage_>`_ implements low-level functionality that manipulates with the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`distlib`_ implements low-level functionality to manipulate the
```

* Fix grammar
* Link the name directly

``dist-info`` directory. The database of installed distributions does not use

> any file named ``provenance_url.json`` based on `the distlib's source code

Reviewer: ```suggestion
any file named ``provenance_url.json``, based on `the distlib's source code
```

Comma helps clarify intended structure here

<https://github.com/pypa/distlib/blob/05375908c1b2d6b0e74bdeb574569d3609db9f56/distlib/database.py#L39-L40>`__.

Pipenv
~~~~~~

> `Pipenv <pipenv_homepage_>`_ uses pip `to install Python package distributions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Pipenv`_ uses pip `to install Python package distributions
```

Link the name directly

> <https://github.com/pypa/pipenv/blob/babd428d8ee3c5caeb818d746f715c02f338839b/pipenv/routines/install.py#L262>`__
> . There wasn't identified any additional logic that would cause backwards

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<https://github.com/pypa/pipenv/blob/babd428d8ee3c5caeb818d746f715c02f338839b/pipenv/routines/install.py#L262>`__.
There wasn't any additional identified logic that would cause backwards
```

* Fix word order
* Fix hard break error splicing the period (and affecting the output)

compatibility issues when introducing the ``provenance_url.json`` file in the
``.dist-info`` directory.

installer
~~~~~~~~~

> installer does not create ``provenance_url.json`` file explicitly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`installer`_ does not create a ``provenance_url.json`` file explicitly.
```

* Link it
* Add missing indefinite article

> Nevertheless, as per :ref:`packaging:recording-installed-packages`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Nevertheless, as per the :ref:`Recording Installed Projects <packaging:recording-installed-packages>`
```

* Add missing definite article
* Hardcode name to avoid relying on it making sense in context

specification, installer allows passing the ``additional_metadata`` argument to
create a file in the ``.dist-info`` directory - see `the source code
<https://github.com/pypa/installer/blob/f89b5d93a643ef5e9858a6e3f450c83a57bbe1f1/src/installer/_core.py#L67>`__.
To avoid any backwards compatibility issues, any library or tool using
installer must not request creating the ``provenance_url.json`` file using the

> mentioned ``additional_metadata`` argument.

Reviewer: On further though, I think I understand why it is the way it is, so marking this as resolved for now.

Poetry
~~~~~~

> The installation logic in `Poetry <poetry_homepage_>`_ depends on the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The installation logic in `Poetry`_ depends on the
```

Link name directly

``installer.modern-installer`` configuration option (`see docs
<https://python-poetry.org/docs/configuration#installermodern-installation>`__).

For cases when the ``installer.modern-installer`` configuration option is set
to ``false``, Poetry uses `pip for installing Python package distributions
<https://github.com/python-poetry/poetry/blob/2b15ce10f02b0c6347fe2f12ae902488edeaaf7c/src/poetry/installation/executor.py#L543-L544>`__.

On the other hand, when ``installer.modern-installer`` configuration option is
set to ``true``, Poetry uses `installer to install Python package distributions
<https://github.com/python-poetry/poetry/blob/2b15ce10f02b0c6347fe2f12ae902488edeaaf7c/src/poetry/installation/wheel_installer.py#L99-L109>`__.
As can be seen from the linked sources, there isn't passed any additional
metadata file named ``provenance_url.json`` that would cause compatibility
issues with this PEP.

Conda
~~~~~

`Conda <conda_homepage_>`_ does not create any ``provenance_url.json`` file
`when Python package distributions are installed
<https://github.com/conda/conda/blob/86e83925e17c68233ac659633bdc4d76b05a245a/conda/common/pkg_formats/python.py#L370-L390>`__.

Hatch
~~~~~

> `Hatch <hatch_homepage_>`_ uses pip `to install project dependencies

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Hatch`_ uses pip `to install project dependencies
```

Ditto

Thanks to Donald Stufft, Ofek Lev, and Trishank Kuppusamy for early feedback
and support to work on this PEP.

> Thanks to Gregory P. Smith, Stéphane Bidoul, and Christopher A. M. Gerlach for

Author: I hope the name is correct, CC @CAM-Gerlach.

Author: Noted, resolved. Thanks! :)

.. _pip_installation_report: https://pip.pypa.io/en/stable/reference/installation-report/

> .. _pdm_homepage: https://pdm.fming.dev/
> 
> .. _poetry_homepage: https://python-poetry.org/
> 
> .. _pipenv_homepage: https://pipenv.pypa.io/
> 
> .. _conda_homepage: https://docs.conda.io/
> 
> .. _distlib_homepage: https://distlib.readthedocs.io/
> 
> .. _micropipenv_homepage: https://github.com/thoth-station/micropipenv
> 
> .. _thamos_homepage: https://github.com/thoth-station/thamos/
> 
> .. _hatch_homepage: https://hatch.pypa.io/

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. _distlib: https://distlib.readthedocs.io/

.. _Pipenv: https://pipenv.pypa.io/

.. _installer: https://github.com/pypa/installer

.. _Poetry: https://python-poetry.org/

.. _Conda: https://docs.conda.io/

.. _Hatch: https://hatch.pypa.io/

.. _micropipenv: https://github.com/thoth-station/micropipenv

.. _Thamos: https://github.com/thoth-station/thamos/

.. _PDM: https://pdm.fming.dev/
```

I recommend eliminating an extra layer of indirection and just linking the canonical project names directly here (since the canonical name can be presumed, without further qualification, to reference the named tool's homepage).

Also, I made the order match the text instead of being (AFAIK) random, and added a missing link for `installer` (which is probably the hardest for users to find on their own of them all due to its generic name).
